Complete Setup & Usage Guide: Raspberry Pi Face Recognition System
This guide will walk you through setting up your Raspberry Pi for a real-time face recognition system using a custom GUI for enrollment and training.


1. Hardware Requirements
Raspberry Pi (preferably Pi 3B+, 4, or 5 for better performance)
Raspberry Pi Camera Module (V2 or V3 recommended, or a compatible CSI camera)
MicroSD card with Raspberry Pi OS installed
Power supply, monitor, keyboard, mouse (or SSH access)


2. Prepare Your Raspberry Pi
Ensure your Raspberry Pi OS is up to date and you have the necessary development tools.
a. Open a Terminal on your Raspberry Pi.

b. Update your system:
sudo apt update
sudo apt full-upgrade -y

c. Install system-level dependencies for dlib (used by face_recognition) and Pillow:
sudo apt install -y build-essential cmake pkg-config libjpeg-dev libpng-dev libtiff-dev libavcodec-dev libavformat-dev libswscale-dev libv4l-dev libxvidcore-dev libx264-dev libgtk-3-dev python3-pip python3-pil python3-pil.imagetk

-build-essential, cmake, pkg-config: For compiling C++ libraries like dlib.
- libjpeg-dev, libpng-dev, libtiff-dev, etc.: Image/video processing libraries.
- libgtk-3-dev: For OpenCV GUI support.
- python3-pip: Python package installer.
- python3-pil, python3-pil.imagetk: Critical for Pillow (PIL) to work with CustomTkinter.

d.Enable the Camera Interface:
- Go to Menu > Preferences > Raspberry Pi Configuration.
- Navigate to the Interfaces tab.
- Ensure Camera is Enabled.
- Click OK and reboot your Raspberry Pi if prompted or if you just enabled the camera.


3. Create Your Project Folder
It's best practice to keep all your project files organized in one dedicated folder.
a.Open a Terminal.
b.Navigate to your desired location (e.g., your Desktop or Documents folder):
cd ~/Desktop/

c.Create the project folder:
mkdir FaceRecognitionApp
cd FaceRecognitionApp


4. Install Python Libraries
Now, install the Python-specific libraries using pip.
a. Ensure you are in your FaceRecognitionApp directory.
b. Install the Python packages:
pip install opencv-python numpy face_recognition imutils picamera2 customtkinter
- Note on face_recognition: This can take a while to install as it compiles dlib. It might seem stuck, but let it run. It's often the longest installation.


5. Create Your Python Scripts
Now, create the two Python files in your FaceRecognitionApp directory.

5.1  Finale_Face_Recognition_training.py (GUI for Enrollment and Training)
This script provides the GUI to capture face images and train your mode

5.2 facial_recognition.py (Real-time Face Recognition)
This script performs the actual real-time face recognition.


6. Run Your Face Recognition System
Now that everything is set up, you can use your application!
